draft blog for TileCode (#7385)
microsoft/pxt: docs/blog/arcade/tilecode.md

![tilecode banner](/static/blog/arcade/tilecode/banner.JPG)

## TileCode: Design, Code, and Play Games on MakeCode Arcade Devices

**Posted on August ???, 2020 by Thomas Ball and Stefania Druga**

[TileCode](https://microsoft.github.io/tilecode) is a game creation app that allows you to design, code, and play video games directly on low-cost [Microsoft MakeCode Arcade gaming handhelds](https://arcade.makecode.com/hardware), as well as in the web browser.

### From Board Games to Retro Video Games

> We draw inspiration from board games with pieces that can move from one square of the board to a nearby square. Board games like checkers (also known as draughts) have been played for thousands of years of human history.  These games are affordable, and their rules are generally simple to understand, but the game play can be very involving and rewarding. Over time, new games have been created by modifying the game rules of existing board games.

Reviewer: Unless early primates or stegosaurus played checkers, "of human history" is implied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We draw inspiration from board games with pieces that can move from one square of the board to a nearby square. Board games like checkers (also known as draughts) have been played for thousands of years.  These games are affordable, and their rules are generally simple to understand, but the game play can be very engaging and rewarding. Over time, new games have been created by modifying the rules of existing board games.
```

Author: thanks, @ganicke

![board games](/static/blog/arcade/tilecode/boardGames.JPG)

> In contrast, video games have been with us for just over half a century, yet constitute a multi-billion-dollar industry with billions of users. Handheld gaming devices, such as shown below, as well as game consoles are primarily devices of consumption. Game production generally requires the use of a different computer, contributing to a digital divide that needlessly separates producers and consumers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, video games have been with us for just over a half-century, yet they constitute a multi-billion dollar industry with billions of users. Handheld gaming devices, such as those shown below, as well as game consoles are primarily consumer devices . Producing games for these devices generally requires the use of a different computer, which contributes to a digital divide that needlessly separates producers and consumers.
```

![TileCode screens](/static/blog/arcade/tilecode/handhelds.JPG)

### TileCode Vision

> TileCode aims to enable everyone to become creators of video games and not just consumers. TileCode leverages the concepts of board games (a board is a grid of squares, board pieces move from square to square, and game rules define the permitted moves) to introduce computational concepts through the medium of video games. Users start with a *low floor* as they are able to simply play a game and change one rule or elements of the game world. Once familiar with the application, players are provided with *wide walls* for creating different types of games. Ultimately, TileCode presents opportunities for *high ceiling* learning activities that challenge users to implement more challenging games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ileCode aims to enable everyone to become creators of video games and not just consumers of them. TileCode leverages the concepts of board games (a board is a grid of squares, board pieces move from square to square, and game rules define the permitted moves) to introduce computational concepts through the medium of video games. Users start with a *low floor* as they are able to simply play a game and change one rule or elements of the game world. Once familiar with the application, players are provided with *wide walls* for creating different types of games. Ultimately, TileCode presents opportunities for *high ceiling* learning activities that challenge users to implement more challenging games.
```

Author: @ganicke  - I don't see any diff here.

Reviewer: Hmm, I think I goofed the paste, ugh.

> TileCode enables the process of game creation to take place on gaming handhelds themselves, rather than tablets/laptops/desktops, using just the **four-way direction pad** and the **A and B buttons** common to most handhelds,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TileCode enables the process of game creation to take place on gaming handhelds themselves, instead of tablets/laptops/desktops, using just the **four-way direction pad** and the **A and B buttons** common to most handhelds,

### TileCode: Design and Coding

As shown on the TileCode home screen (below-left), there are eight game slots available to program (on an Arcade device, game assets are stored in the device's non-volatile flash memory; in the browser, game assets are stored in browser local storage). For each game, TileCode allows users to select game characters (sprites) and game background (tiles) from a gallery, modify the sprites and tile backgrounds, and create a game level by editing the game map, as shown in the three other screens:

![TileCode screens](/static/blog/arcade/tilecode/screens.JPG)

A TileCode program is a set of rules, each of which is associated with a sprite. A rule takes the form of a **When-Do** pair, as shown below on the left (screen labeled "code"). The **When** section visually describes a pattern/predicate over the 3x3 local neighborhood around the central sprite (the player sprite, in this case) to be matched against the tile map.  The **Do** section contains commands that are sent to the identified sprite when the pattern matches.

![When-Do Rule](/static/blog/arcade/tilecode/editPlayMap.JPG)

> The rule above fires when the user presses the right-dpad button, and there is a player sprite on the tile map, and there is grass on the tile to the right of the player, sending the player sprite a move-right command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule above fires when the user presses the right-dpad button, a player sprite is on the tile map, and there is grass on the tile to the right of the player. This sends the player sprite a move-right command.
```

> From this rule example we see how TileCode encourages the user to explore the relationship between the data on the map and how the rules fire based on the patterns present in this map. In the rule coding screen (shown above), the user can play the game, return to the coding screen to change the rule and see its effect on game play. She can also visit the tile map editor and make changes to enable or disable the firing of a rule. (Many beginner game creation environments use block-based programming that emphasizes the **structured control-flow** constructs of modern programming languages. In contrast, TileCode uses **cellular automata** as its basic programming model, in which parallel pattern matching against the tile map is the main focus).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this rule example we see how TileCode encourages the user to explore the relationship between the data on the map and how the rules fire based on the patterns present in this map. In the rule coding screen (shown above), the user can play the game, return to the coding screen to change the rule, and see its effect on game play. She can also visit the tile map editor and make changes to enable or disable the firing of a rule. (Many beginner game creation environments use block-based programming that emphasizes the **structured control-flow** constructs of modern programming languages. In contrast, TileCode uses **cellular automata** as its basic programming model, in which parallel pattern matching against the tile map is the main focus).
```

Reviewer: There's only a comma inserted in `` to change the rule, and`` but the diff isn't showing.
